0. Crisis, from the actors' perspective
The state of crisis reveals what actors consider "normal" and what is not for a cryptocurrency: a hiatus is recognized, more or less brutally, between the actions prescribed by the design (and the designers) and the actions actually carried out, questioning the dichotomies opposing routine to dysfunction, bug to attack, normal to exceptional, as well as the actors and devices participating in their establishment.

The rigorist understanding of the "code is law" slogan empties the very concepts of flaws, vulnerabilities, bugs, or even attacks of any foundation. From the perspective that would have cryptocurrency governance rely on a single sovereign computer code, all results of a code are by definition normal, indisputable and legitimate.

If we must take the "Code is Law" slogan seriously, it is in the original sense it takes in Lessig (2000): it requires a parallel between code and law, not the hypothetical substitution of one, failing and arbitrary because "wet," by efficient and neutral technique because coded "dry," substitution that N. Szabo (2008b) assumes: if law is conflictual due to its interpretative dimension, the same is true for "computer code and computer-readable files (insofar as: [if normally] a computer processes them consistently)," in times of crisis precisely, it processes them inconsistently. The interpretative dimension inherent in law is also present for codes: we find the conceptual opposition between the "letter" and the "spirit of the law." The application of a law presupposes an interpretative activity by the judge, mixing the letter of the law (legislative texts and the literal interpretation they allow) and its spirit, supposed to grasp the underlying intentions of a legislative text. Similarly, Bitcoin's canonical protocol rules go beyond their syntax and semantics (the letter of the codes), encompassing developers' intentions, community debates and their compromises, which will translate into the inclusion/exclusion of new features, the publication of new versions, or even forks.

Hence the paradox. Many coiners claim to belong to the camp of the radicalized rule, notably Satoshi: what is written in the code is/must be indisputable and immutable. However, it is impossible to confuse the legal and the legitimate according to a "Code is Law" reducing the spirit of the code to its letter alone: here, no dysfunction, only functioning. As proof, even the most rigorist coiners mobilize crisis terminology - speaking of flaws, attacks, the "honesty" expected from nodes (Nakamoto 2008) - and add to these codes a supplement of soul, a normativity without which they have no meaning. They thereby mobilize a normativity presupposing a "social contract" and various devices, without which no problematic gap between the desired product of a code (its "spirit") and the result of its "letter" can be recognized.

This hiatus and its recognition refer to a normalization process from which coiners draw different types of crises/modifications of canonical consensual protocol rules. Four situations appear possible, depending on whether or not the protocol software "codes" ("their letter") and the expectations that community members have of them (their "spirit") coincide, as represented in the following table.